---
title: "Note 1"
date: "2022-09-06"
---
## ODE

#### Def.
An equation involves one independent variable and its derivatives is called an `ode`.

An equation involves two or more independent variable and its partial dervatives, we call it `pde`.

#### Def.
The order of `ode` is the highest derivative that appears in the equation.

Ex. (2nd order)
$$
y^{\prime\prime}(t) + 2(y^\prime(t))^2 = 2
$$

#### Remark
We often form a `ode` as:
$$
F(t, y(t), y^\prime(t), ..., y^{(n)}(t)) = 0
$$

#### Def.
`Linear`: If `ode` in this form:
$$
\begin{aligned}
F(y(t), y^\prime(t), ..., y^{(n)}(t)) = 0\\
a_1(t)y(t) + a_2(t)y^\prime(t) + \cdots = 0
\end{aligned}
$$
(no $t$) is linear, then we say its linear.

Counterexample: (not linear)
$$
\begin{aligned}
y^\prime y = t\\
y^\prime + sin(y) = t
\end{aligned}
$$

### Two Examples
Two important examples, Newton's Law and Animal Growth Speed (Field Mice and Owls).
#### Newton's Law

A mass object falling down, we have:
$$
(F =)\ m{dv\over dt} = mg
$$
Consider the fore due to air resistance coefficient $\gamma$, we have:
$$
m{dv\over dt} = mg - \gamma v
$$

This is a first order and linear `ode`. For ${dv\over dt}=0$, we have the equilibrium solution.

#### Field Mice and Owls.
The mouse population $p(t)$, the proportionality factor $r$ is the rate constant or growth rate, $k$ is the predation rate. we have
$$
{dp\over dt} = rp - k
$$
The equilibrium solution is $p(t) = k/r$.

#### Solution for these two examples

$$
\begin{aligned}
{dp\over dt} &= rp - k\\
{dp\over dt (p-k/r)} &= {r}\\
{1\over dt}{dp\over (p-k/r)} &= {r}\\
{1\over dt}{d\ln(p-k/r)} &= {r}\\
{dt\over dt}{d\ln(p-k/r)} &= {r}dt\\
\int {d\ln(p-k/r)} &= \int {r}dt\\
\ln(p-k/r) &= {t\over r}+C\\
p-k/r &= e^{ {t\over r}+C} = e^Ce^{rt}\\
p &= {k\over r}+e^Ce^{rt}\\
p &= {k\over r}+ce^{rt}
\end{aligned}
$$
For general solution, we replace $c={p_0 - {k\over r} }$, then
$$
p(t) = {k\over r}+(p_0 - {k\over r})e^{rt}
$$


For Newton's Law:
$$
\begin{aligned}
m{dv\over dt} &= mg - \gamma v \\
m{dv\over dt} &= \gamma({mg\over \gamma} - v) \\
{m\over dt} {dv\over {mg\over \gamma} - v} &= \gamma \\
-{m\over dt} \ln({mg\over \gamma} - v) &= \gamma\\
\int-{m\over dt} \ln({mg\over \gamma} - v)dt &= \int\gamma dt\\
-m \ln({mg\over \gamma} - v) &= \gamma t + C\\
\ln({mg\over \gamma} - v) &= {-\gamma t\over m} + C\\
{mg\over \gamma} - v &= e^{ {-\gamma t\over m} + C} \\
v &= {mg\over \gamma} - e^{ {-\gamma t\over m} + C} \\
v &= {mg\over \gamma} - ce^{-\gamma t\over m} \\
\end{aligned}
$$
In general, we have
$$
v(t) = {mg\over \gamma} + (v_0 - {mg\over \gamma})e^{-\gamma t / m}
$$

#### Another Chemical Ex.
Consider a mount of xx water $y$ in pound (box?), we have (per unit time)
$$
{dy\over dt} = water_{flow\ in} - water_{flow\ out}
$$
This ex. is as same form as the 2nd ex. above.
